# Translation

The game server supports internationalisation ("i18n") using [lean-i18n](https://github.com/hhu-adam/lean-i18n) and [i18next](https://www.npmjs.com/package/i18next).

The intended workflow currently is the following:

1. When you call `lake build` in your game, it should automatically create a template file `.i18n/en/Game.pot`. Alternatively you can call `lake exe i18n --template` to recreate it.
2. Open the file `Game.pot` (the "t" stands for "template") with [Poedit](https://poedit.net/) (or a similar software) and translate all strings. Save your work as `.i18n/{language}/Game.po`.
4. Call `lake exe i18n --export-json` to create all Json files `.i18n/{language}/Game.json` which the server needs.
5. Add your translations (i.e. `.po` and `.json`, but not the `.mo` files) and push your results, and [publish the game](publish_game.md).

If you choose the correct language in the "Preferences" of the game, you should see your translations.

## Details

For the translations, codeblocks (starting with one or many backticks (\`)) and
latex blocks (starting with one or two `$`) are replaced by placeholders `§n`,
you see the content of these in the comments.  The aim of this pre-processing step is 
to (a) aviod typos created by manually copying over codeblocks or latex blocks, and 
(b) to improve interaction with automated translation tooling.

## Alternative: avoiding .po

Note: This workflow is subject to change, and it might be that in future the server can directly read `.po` files. Until then, there is also an alternative workflow you might choose:

0. Add `useJson: true` to `.i18n/config.json`
1. `lake build` or `lake exe i18n --template` will now create a Json instead: `.i18n/en/Game.json`.
2. Add translations to a copy of this Json an save it as `.i18n/{language}/Game.json`

## Non-English games

For games written in a language different than English, you should set the correct source language (`sourceLang`) in `.i18n/config.json`. Afterwards, on `lake build` the template should appear under the chosen language, and can be translated (e.g. into English) as described above.

Note that tools like `pomerge` might be useful: it allows you something like

```
pomerge de-en.po en-fr.po -o de-fr.po
```

For example, you can first create an English translation, then let people translate that
into their own language and finally use `pomerge` to create the right PO-file from source
to target language.

## New languages

The server has a set number of languages one can select.
If your game has been translated to a language not selectable, [open an issue at lean4game](https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean4game/issues) requesting this new language.
Or, even better, create a PR to translate the [server interface](https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean4game/tree/main/client/public/locales) into that new language.

## Review

Since the maintainers of this repository (or of games) might not know most languages,
it is encouraged that you find anybody from the Lean community who can review your translation
and leave a positive comment on the PR.

The main intend for having a secondary reviewer from the community is to prevent wrong translations as well as offensive or inappropriate language.

A few suggestions:

1. The JSON files are autogenerated from the PO files and can therefore be superficially reviewed.
2. Formatting should be preserved during translation. While there are placeholders for code snippets, the reviewer might pay attention on details like punctuation, etc.
3. [POEdit](https://poedit.net/) is a great tool specifically designed for the translation and review process! Among other
  things, it allows you to specifically review a given range of sentences, e.g. 50-100 at a time, and allows to distribute the work more easily.
